================
Repository Setup
================

This page describes the GitHub repository settings and configuration files that make
the CI/CD workflows and tooling of this project work. Its purpose is to record the
operational state of the repository as well as to allow the setup to be reproduced
for similar projects.

.. contents:: Page Content
   :local:

--------------------------
GitHub Repository Settings
--------------------------

This section documents all settings of the GitHub repository made directly on the
platform outside the source tree.

Repository Secrets
..................

Under **Settings → Secrets and variables → Actions**, the following repository
secret is stored:

:envvar:`RENOVATE_TOKEN`: Fine-grained personal access token used by the Renovate
bot (running as a regular CI job) to authenticate against the GitHub API for opening
and merging pull requests. The token must belong to a user with write access to
the repository through the following permissions:

- Read access to metadata
- Read and write access to code, issues, pull requests, and workflows

Branch Protection Rules
.......................

Under **Settings → Rules → Rulesets** or **Settings → Branches**, the
following rules apply to the default branch.

1. **Pull request before merging** -- Direct pushes to the main branch are
   blocked so all changes go through pull requests:

   - *Require a pull request before merging* with *Dismiss stale pull request
     approvals when new commits are pushed*

   - *Require status checks to pass* with *Status checks that are required*:
     ``tests``

   ``tests`` is the final aggregator job from the testing CI workflow that
   collects the results from either the full test suite or the dummy test
   suite, depending on which files have been changed.

2. **Copilot code review** -- Another rule enables *Automatically request Copilot
   code review* to review each pull request to the main branch.

The setup ensures that during normal development commits to the main branch only
occur via pull requests from feature branches. This allows the commits to be reviewed
manually and with machine assistance (e.g. Copilot Code Review). Also, the test suite,
documentation builds, and other base quality checks must pass before changes
land in main.

.. note ::

   As it turns out, AI-assisted code reviews help identify edge cases and overlooked
   changes for consistency. At the same time, they must be taken with a grain of salt,
   as they tend to be nit-picky or rely on outdated knowledge:

   - The comment could be rewritten more clearly
   - Renovate warns to migrate the config and Copilot advises reverting the very change
   - ...


---------------------
Project Configuration
---------------------

This project uses a combination of Python in the backend and TypeScript in the
frontend. Therefore, the project configuration uses a :file:`pyproject.toml` file
as well as multiple :file:`package.json` files in different locations to declare
dependencies and utility scripts. The main logic is this:

.. rst-class:: spaced-list

1. All backend dependencies are collected in :file:`pyproject.toml` at the project root.
   Dependency groups are used to separate runtime dependencies from tooling.

2. Additional Node.js-based development tools are declared as development dependencies
   in the root-level :file:`package.json` file. Additionally, this file contains run scripts
   as shortcuts for typical development tasks. Workspaces are defined to centralize
   shared dependencies across the JavaScript sub-projects.

3. Frontend sub-projects have their own ``package.json`` file as normal. But usually,
   run scripts are declared so that they can either be executed inside a single
   project directory for a single project or from the parent directory for all
   sub-projects alike.

:file:`pyproject.toml`
......................

This file is the central project configuration managed by `Poetry <https://python-poetry.org/>`_.
:confval:`package-mode` is set to ``false`` because OpenBook is a Django application, not a Python package
published to PyPI.

:file:`poetry.lock`
...................

This file is generated by Poetry and committed to the repository so every
environment resolves identical dependency versions.

:file:`package.json`
....................

This file is the npm workspace root manifest. All JavaScript and TypeScript
sub-projects — the frontend application and the component libraries — are
declared as workspaces under :file:`src/frontend/*` and :file:`src/libraries/*`.

Run scripts across all :file:`package.json` files follow a similar pattern.
Simple scripts like ``lint`` normally don't do anything by themselves,
except running other scripts with the same prefix, e.g. ``lint:frontend``
and ``lint:backend``. At the root level, these are just different steps
of a pipeline. In the source directories these are wrappers around similar
scripts in child directories.

For example, the projects in :file:`src/frontend/admin` and :file:`src/frontend/app`
both define ``build`` scripts that run different build steps one after
another, like ``build:src``, ``build:tailwind`` and so on. To simplify
integration in bigger pipelines, the file :file:`src/frontend/package.json`
defines the wrappers ``build:admin`` and ``build:app`` that are called
by a single ``build`` script.

:file:`package-lock.json`
.........................

Auto-generated npm lock file. Committed to the repository to ensure reproducible
installs (when installing with :command:`npm ci` as opposed to :command:`npm install`).


------------
CI Workflows
------------


The repository uses GitHub Actions for recurring CI workflows triggered
by different events.

Test Suite / Documentation
..........................

The following workflows run tests and test builds when source files change.
Some effort is made to limit test runs to relevant source files, but there
can still be false positives. We don't try to over-optimize the checks, as
an extra test run too often causes little harm.

:file:`.github/workflows/run-tests.yml` (and friends)
.....................................................

Testing is always started via this workflow. It analyzes the changed files
and decides whether to route to :file:`.github/workflows/run-tests-full.yml`
for the real test suite or :file:`.github/workflows/run-tests-dummy.yml` for
dummy testing. This gives a lightweight success path for pull requests
that don't need the full test suite running.

:file:`.github/workflows/build-docs.yml`
........................................

This workflow test-builds the Sphinx manual. Build output is not retained,
as Read the Docs rebuilds the documentation anyway. But it helps to catch
build errors during the development cycle.

Dependency Upgrades
...................

:file:`.github/workflows/run-renovate.yml`
..........................................

Scheduled dependency updates via Renovate, running weekly every Monday.
It can also be triggered manually.

Release Automation
..................

:file:`.github/workflows/release.yml`
.....................................

Creates a GitHub Release from a signed version tag (e.g. ``v0.0.1-rc1``).
See :doc:`/developers/versioning-and-releases` for details.


-------------
Read the Docs
-------------

The repository includes :file:`.readthedocs.yaml` and :file:`docs/conf.py`, but Read
the Docs still requires one-time project configuration outside the repository.
The project is configured in Read the Docs with the following settings:

- GitHub Repository: https://github.com/openbook-education/openbook
- Enable the GitHub webhook
- ``latest`` tracks the ``main`` branch, and ``stable`` tracks the last version.
- Versions are tagged with ``v*``, e.g. ``v2.0.0``.

:file:`docs/conf.py`
....................

This file serves as the primary Sphinx documentation configuration. It defines
extensions, the sphinx-rtd-theme, and build options.

:file:`.readthedocs.yaml`
.........................

This file is the Read the Docs build configuration. It installs
Poetry after environment creation, overrides the install step to install the
project together with the docs dependency group, and builds the site with
Sphinx.


------------------
Dependency Updates
------------------

:file:`renovate.json5`
......................

This file is the configuration for `Renovate <https://docs.renovatebot.com/>`_.
It manages dependencies across all package managers: ``poetry``, ``npm``,
``docker-compose``, ``dockerfile``, ``github-actions``, and a custom regex
manager that tracks Python and Node.js versions declared in CI workflows.

Automerge is enabled for digest, patch, and minor updates of packages at
version ``1.0.0`` or above (pre-1.0 packages require manual review because
semantic versioning allows breaking changes in any ``0.x`` release).
Major updates are labelled ``major-update`` and left open for manual review.
Lock-file maintenance PRs are also automerged.


-----------------------
Local Development Tools
-----------------------

:file:`.editorconfig`
.....................

`EditorConfig <https://editorconfig.org/>`_ settings applied by supporting editors
(VS Code, JetBrains IDEs, …) to enforce project-wide formatting defaults.

:file:`eslint.config.js`
........................

`ESLint <https://eslint.org/>`_ configuration in the new flat config format.

Defines separate rule sets for plain JavaScript files (``*.{js,mjs,cjs}``) and
TypeScript files (``*.{ts,tsx,mts,cts}``). TypeScript rules are provided by
``@typescript-eslint/eslint-plugin``. Import order and unused-import detection
use ``eslint-plugin-import`` and ``eslint-plugin-unused-imports``.
Auto-generated directories such as the API client and auth client are excluded
from linting.

:file:`.gitignore`
..................

This file defines ignore rules for Python cache directories, virtual
environments, and local build artifacts.

:file:`.prettierrc`
...................

`Prettier <https://prettier.io/>`_ code formatter settings. Notable settings:

- ``"printWidth": 130`` — wider than the Prettier default of 80.
- ``"tabWidth": 4`` — consistent with :file:`.editorconfig`.
- ``"singleQuote": false`` — double quotes everywhere.
- ``"trailingComma": "es5"`` — trailing commas where valid in ES5.
- ``"semi": true`` — semicolons required.

:file:`tsconfig.base.json`
..........................

This file is the base TypeScript configuration shared by all frontend
sub-projects. It extends ``@tsconfig/svelte`` and sets:

- ``"target": "esnext"`` and ``"module": "esnext"`` with
  ``"moduleResolution": "Bundler"`` — suited for esbuild-bundled Svelte
  applications.
- ``"strict": true`` — full strict type checking.
- ``"noEmit": true`` — TypeScript is used for type checking only; esbuild
  handles transpilation.
- ``"verbatimModuleSyntax": true`` — enforces explicit ``import type`` for
  type-only imports.

:file:`tsconfig.nodejs.json`
............................

This file is a companion TypeScript configuration for Node.js scripts such as
the esbuild build scripts under :file:`bin/`. It overrides the base configuration
with ``"module": "nodenext"`` and ``"moduleResolution": "NodeNext"`` for
correct native ESM resolution, and enables output emission with source maps
and declaration files.
